hi everybody welcome
lovely to see you
um
wherever you are in the world it's a
beautiful evening um here in devon
england
so thank you so much for
joining us tonight you could be out in
the sunshine but it's uh lovely to see
you
and welcome to anyone who is watching on
the recording and i think there will be
quite a few of those um so
we are um talking about contemporary
animism
um tonight this is a talk in our
contemporary animism programme
um
we are really delighted to uh
show you an interview that we did some
time ago with a chap called chris batch
um colin is going to introduce him a bit
more in depth but just to say that he
took part in our contemporary animism
confluence back in february
and we just thought that what he had to
say was just so um
hopeful at a moment when we as a species
as a
community of species are looking at a
fairly dark night of the soul with all
the climate change news and and social
crises and
it just seems that that chris's vision
um
is just one of hope and um we really
hope you'll enjoy it what we're going to
do tonight is basically play the
interview
it's quite heady i'll just warn you uh
there's a lot of talking um and it and
it goes for about 50 minutes
and what we'd really like to do is for
you to watch it to go in and out of it
as you like and
uh then to stay with us for 10-15
minutes afterwards if you're interested
to and just share some of your feelings
the the stuff that might have come up
for you as you are watching it
um just to see whether you yes you you
like it whether you're excited as us or
um whether it's not for you
so without further ado
colin can i can i ask you to introduce
chris also just to just to give you the
logistics of chris he is a professor of
theology
um
retired uh from one of the american
universities and he's the author of um
several books all of which are wonderful
the first one is about
reincarnation the second one is called
dark knight early dawn which was
fantastic
and his most recent one and the one that
he will be talking about tonight um
describes his research method um which
he'll tell you more about um called lsd
in the mind of the universe
colin over to you
thanks rachel
good evening everyone
um
yeah i mean i i don't almost know where
to start um because well let me start by
saying this it was about i think a year
ago a little more relatively recently i
stumbled upon
the title dark knight early dawn and i
was particularly struck by the
subtitle which is steps towards a new
ecology of mind and and that for me just
rang massively and i simply had to get
ahold of this book and read it just
because of that
because because that's just such a huge
passion of mine in the sense that i
think that what we are
in search of in these times and amid the
very particular
um
conundrums and transformations and
all that we're up against in in both
crisis and and other terms as a human
collective
what we're faced with is a kind of a
a re
a redo of what we conceive of as our
relationship with existence with life
with
the rest of the natural world and so on
so the idea of a new ecology of mine
really appealed to me and i must say
i wasn't disappointed by the book um it
really i think it's a
it's a seminal piece to be very honest i
think you know
he was saying
some really profound things um and
things which are very close to my heart
as well
in terms of
finding ways into in an experiential way
reinvigorating much of what we've lost
um over over the
um during the process of kind of
secularization industrialization
globalization and so on
um
finding a way of of of re-entering
re-accessing that and revivifying it
bring it bringing it back into our
uh into into being part of our kind of
search for
what being human means now and here
forward
um
you know and i was you know for me
uh
there are lots of ways of of kind of
entering into this but of course the
primary way of
exploring into it is to is to kind of
delve deeply into
what it means to be human
and
part of the problem we sit with
presently is that we're so
drastically
uh
distracted in the world that we've
created for ourselves presently and i
mean by that the
uh primarily the industrialized world
we're we're so distracted you know by
our outer concerns that our inner
environments or what we broadly refer to
as our inner environment and what i
would call our
our pre-industrial ancestry which of
course is dynamically within us
but has somehow
fallen beneath the
level of our everyday interactive
awareness
um you know where that that
unfortunately
as we question this this conundrum of
how we move forward as a species how we
re
uh negotiate our relationship with the
next
the rest of the natural world how we
confront
um or at least
engage with
some of the more dramatic crises that we
face as a humanity now um
you know we need to
we need to find ways of bringing back
what i conceive of is that as that part
of us that has been
sequestered off
um that pre-industrial aspect of who we
are um there which has kind of been
labeled regressive and you know
primitive and all sorts of names
that we use in a sense to sublimate it
and
trivialize it and depreciate it and
throw it out of the
um
the kind of uh i don't quite know what
to call it but the engagement with where
we're at
um and so
you know when i came across chris's work
and and i've i've read some of his
subsequent work and of course before
that i
was a a great follower of stan groff's
work um out of which a lot of chris's
work comes
um
you know i i i just think that this is
an incredibly important
way of delving into
uh in a radical way i also say i'm you
know i'm very
deeply of the belief that
our engagement right now with the state
that we find ourselves in as a humanity
requires
a radical
potent engagement you know we can't
really afford to
uh dabble around on the edges of things
so if we're going to look at
finding contemporized forms of our
pre-industrial ancestry if we're going
to look at experiential exploration deep
delving into who we are what we are and
our broken relationships with the
natural world
there has to be a radicalness to this
because it's urgent it's desperate
in fact um and and so
you know
with groff's work and with with chris's
writing subsequently and his
experimentation and exploration his deep
and profound in my opinion courage in in
the way he's gone in
um i i think this is just you know it's
such a profound part
of what we are
certainly what i'm passionate about in
this time uh in terms of the kind of
work that we're doing as rachel said
earlier in in our contemporary animism
program and
trying to rally you know interest in an
experiential
uh
exploration of what reanimating
ourselves might mean might look like
um and i just think that you know i i
think that this is what you're going to
see tonight in this talk is the absolute
tip of a
a profound iceberg if we could put it
that way
you know as he it's well worth reading
his work
it's well worth looking at groff's work
as well
it's very much in my opinion a critical
part of the kind of exploration that i
think is most needed at this time pardon
my bias on this but i really do believe
this so
um that having been said i'm going to
pass back to rachel um and
i'll be very interested to hear some of
your reflections at the end thank you
fantastic thank you colin so we'll dive
straight in um
i have just asked him so we've just
started and i have asked him
um
just to tell us about his research
method and how he
how he came to the vision that um
he will then tell you about later on in
the interview um and how that fits into
kind of the animist world that we're
exploring so it starts in the middle of
sentence is his first sentence so you've
only missed about two or three words um
but yes that's where we'll start so i'm
going to hand over to you now gabby and
enjoy um i find him very mind-blowing um
but see what you think
gabby go thank you
we're not getting any sound gabby
i know this works because we checked it
earlier so
sorry what's the what's the problem
rachel we're not getting any sound on it
is anybody getting any sound on it nope
[Music]
oh after all after the introduction
that's going to be uh disappointing if
you can't hear him
any insights here because i'm not
exactly sure what's going on you want to
give it another john press go again and
we'll share in the animistic community
is the belief that nature is infused
with consciousness it's fused with mind
and soul
and of course now we know how vast the
physical universe is and the question
becomes
how large is the mind of the universe
how deep is it
and so i was just out of graduate school
in 1978 in my
finishing philosophy of religion and i
met the work of stanislav grogg whom
many of you know
one of the foremost thinkers in the
transpersonal psychology community in
the psychedelic community
and i read his book realms of the human
unconscious
and my life pivoted with that book
because i immediately saw
that his research was relevant not only
to clinical psychology but also to
philosophy
but it would he was offering a method to
actually safely and systematically
explore the deepest levels of
consciousness
wherein lay the answers to the
philosophical questions that i was
carrying coming out of a training in
religious studies
so in 1979 i began what became a 20-year
journey
working with lsd and
it was 1979 lsd is what stan had done
his research with and that's what i
chose to continue with if i were doing
it today i would have a more diversified
cocktail of ayahuasca civil side but
more but i worked with lsd and i chose
to work with very high doses
for reasons that are too complicated to
go into now
but that had a profound impact on the
work because it not only changed how
deep the wind work the work went but it
changed how wide it went
the field of consciousness that i took
in these transformational
exercises
expanded with the power of the state of
consciousness that i was entering to
enter into these exercises
so basically i did this work in standard
graffian protocol totally isolated from
the world with the sitter
trained clinical psychologists that are
i did it at home
in a controlled environment totally
internally focused not in any with any
contact with the outside world
amplifying the states of awareness with
carefully selected music designed to
empower
the states of consciousness
in which you basically just shatter your
mind
in
essentially working at these levels you
just shatter your mind and your mind
dissolves out into subtler and subtler
forms
or aspects of reality
and it became a systematic exploration
of what i think of as the mind of the
universe i hesitate to call the divine
though sometimes i do it's just because
the divine has so many culturally
infused
qualities in history that i'd rather
avoid
so i think of it as the mind of the
universe
and i did this work for 20 years
i always keeping very careful records
and whatnot
and then i i digested those experiences
for another 20 years because this is
these are not immediately transparent
experiences they're very complex and
interwoven and they involved many levels
of reality being orchestrated in the
same kind of titles that surges of these
states
there was a systematic instruction i
found that one session more or less
started where the other session stopped
when you work in this systematic fashion
there was progressive deepening and
deepening and deepening and so it just
took years
for me to
understand
what the universe was showing me and
where it was taking me and i was being
shown things i mean
i always had a sense of a systematic
encounter
with an intelligence that was
orchestrating my experience in dialogue
with me
not taking any form never taking any any
deity form or any archetypal form but
always
when pressed dissolving into deeper and
deeper layers of infinity
uh anyway so that is cumulatively the
story that i'm telling in lsd in the
mind of the universe
and would you say chris that this is an
objective reality that if anybody that
did a similar method i mean i think i
think what you did was incredibly brave
but
would would everybody kind of reach this
unfolding that you did
using that method or is that not
possible to say
i think i think it is possible to say i
think stan groff's work allows us to say
it
and where he's dealing with integrating
the experiences of thousands of people
and i'm only talking integrating my
experiences but my experiences fit
comfortably within the larger matrix
that growth is
work is explored
and it's a complicated answer because on
the one hand i want to say yes
and on the other hand i have to qualify
that immediately because when you begin
this work
these substances only amplify
consciousness they don't give you an
experience they don't take you a
particular place they amplify your mind
and because each of us has a different
life story
then the mind which is amplified is
different and we therefore when an
amplified mind engages the deeper mind
of the universe
what comes forward will be in the
beginning somewhat unique and will
reflect our individual history and
why these substances are very helpful
for healing
they evoke our unconscious and therefore
they evoke our problems and as an
individual experience
but if you keep going farther
if you press to the limits of of your
time space identity if you press to the
limits of what your individual history
can hold and go through this
transformation we call ego death
then you begin to open into spiritual
reality farther removed from your own
personal history and that's when the
experiences begin to overlap that's when
they begin to
converge
now
my understanding is that spiritual
reality is not simply something you
enter and pluck fruit from like plucking
an apple from a tree it's interactive
it's always interactive so there's a
participatory quality to our experiences
so the mind that we bring to the
encounter
acts as a seed catalyst that
crystallizes a certain set of
experiences from the infinite potential
of the mind of the universe and then as
we internalize those experiences and are
purified by those experiences it changes
the seed mind and then we it catalyzes
an even deeper level
of secrets from the universe so it's a
both end situation
it's participatory
but once you understand the cycle of
participation then i think
the universe that we discover
is coherent and consistent my universe
is the same universe that is discovered
by
contemplative monks the mystical
traditions the near-death episode
traditions
there are degrees of depth and then we
have to be careful because
you can reach a point where you think oh
this is what the reality is
and it turns out well no this is what
reality is at this level of reality but
you can pop that and go into a deeper
level of reality
things change a bit
one thing that i find really exciting
about your work is that we talk about
practices you know that finding the
right practices to find the cracks kind
of in ourselves to get back to a much
more poorest expanded way of being
and yet these practices take repetition
and tenaciousness and everything
and and
you have used a different method here
you've
used what what one might kind of think
of as a fast track to some of these
experiences i mean it's a very difficult
method and i'm sure not one that you
would kind of recommend to a lot of
people but
that that feels
for me where the excitement of your work
is as you first tracked a lot of slower
practices
and possibly got
to the edge of the map that a lot of
these con templative practices have
booked to um
i feel as though you've managed to go
further than than much that i've seen
before on kind of what what the
underlying nature of reality is would
you say that's
true
it is a fast track except
uh
it's a fast track that doesn't allow any
bypassing
so the fact that it's a fast track
means it's a much more intensely
concentrated track so purification which
in the conventional spiritual path would
be drawn out over years can take place
within days
and as any woman who's given birth knows
a short labor is not necessarily an easy
year labor it's just much much more
intense and this is true for this type
of practice too
the purifications that one goes through
in order to acclimate to these subtler
and cleaner and clearer states of
reality those purifications and
detoxifications are extremely intense i
mean
they send you in convulsions across the
floor and throwing up constantly coming
and going
and they require
a systematic purification of your
lifestyle just as any traditional
spiritual practice does
and i want to emphasize that
the states of consciousness that i
touched for hours at a time
we usually only learn about these
realities
from the work of contemplative mystics
who have a certain sense that they abide
in these realities and i emphasize that
this is a practice not of abiding
it's a temporary access it's only
temporary immersion in these states and
i don't want to confuse temporary
immersion from abiding immersion all
honor to the great ones who abide in
these realities
you know this is different this is
temporary access very very intense
purification
but
you don't come away with permanent
access embedded in your nature to these
realities
what you come away with are seeds
of transcendence or seed experiences
which you then have to nurture within
your
your daily spiritual practice you have
to nurture them within your embodied
physical existence
and i also want to mention that
these practices in the earlier times in
history have tended to be associated
with the dissociative spirituality so
the goal was to get up into
transcendence and get away from earth
you know so these are the up and out
cosmologies of the last five sexual age
religions in the last five thousand
years
the cosmology that emerged in my work is
very different it wasn't about getting
transcendence
it was transcendence in service of
incarnation transcendence and service of
deeper integration it was about opening
up and letting in as much of the
universe as possible and then going
through the transformations that would
allow this energy to live in the
historical body
and giving me
at one point insights into where
the evolutionary intelligence was taking
the human family as a whole
i began this work thinking in terms of a
personal model of transformation
but things happen that just shattered
that model
and i began to understand that i was had
been drawn into a collective
transformation and that my my so-called
individual work was part of a collective
process which then naturally yielded
some insights into our
collective
family human family evolutionary
trajectory
fantastic and i want to ask you about
that in great depths in a minute because
for me that's kind of the exciting um
thing that you
discovered if you like but first of all
i'd love to ask you about
the aliveness and intelligence in the
universe then um
we are talking about um the aliveness
and intelligence in everything around us
you know and humans being just one load
of that that just kind of as is
everything um
an animate world an animated universe i
just wondered if you could
summarize your um
understandings of the aliveness in the
universe and how layered that is and how
deep that goes how big it is um
yes what did you what did you mean
oh you're asking a lot because
you know the universe is so vast and the
mind of the universe has so many layers
to it
and those layers are of course all
complexly intertwined and it's all alive
and it's all intelligent
and it's it's everywhere we dig into the
universe of course we discover aliveness
and intelligence we're finding that we
can't dig in anywhere and not encounter
this intelligence this living
intelligence
so when you dig into the mind of the
universe you find
layers of intelligence operating there
there are
layers of entire intelligence operating
in the biosphere operating in the
incarnational
rhythms of a planet i i began to
experience at one point for example
reincarnation the i had gone into
i'm sorry to cut so many corners here
but there's no way to do it except jump
into it go into states of consciousness
in which time was radically dilated not
eternity not timelessness but radical
dilations of time
and dilations of
of
personal boundaries so dissolving into
my human family becoming the human
family and from that perspective
experiencing
reincarnation the pulse of reincarnation
taking place
all of us together as a single organism
incarnate
generation by generation
and i experienced whole lifetimes
incarnating in generations living their
lives
dying and returning into the spiritual
reality and there was an intelligence
to this entire process so that all of
our what i had previously thought of as
individual karma individual challenging
individual transformation all of our
individual karma was part of a vast
network of exquisitely tuned
collective karma
and our and history was expressing
the rhythms of collective transformation
through the medium of our individual
transformation
just one example and then going deeper
beginning to experience the pulse of the
entire universe as a single living
organism
and when you when you dissolve it into
that level of oneness
you know the the buddhists have a word
for it they talk about nirvana
blown out itself is blown out their
emptiness of self
when you experience the world as one in
any
scale
then you experience that there are no
permanent boundaries between yourself
and the world so literally there is no
private self
and so the self kind of pops
and life
runs through you you run through life
and the whole of life
reads as one it breathes together
as platinum said
so
everywhere you touch it
the world is intelligent at the very end
of my journey after in the 70th session
out of 73 i did 73 sessions
in the 70th session i was taken deep
deep deep into what i call deep time
farther into time than i had ever been
taken before
and given a series of visions
and one of those visions
had to do with experiencing
in some way from my perspective in my
history
the large story of what was happening in
the universe and i experienced
reincarnation i was experiencing
the same deep pattern
and i experienced
stars of light shooting out of time and
space
shooting into the universe
and i
i understood that these were what i call
diamond souls these were the fruition of
a reincarnation process creating a
diamond pure
a soul that could explore the spiritual
world in dimensions previously
unavailable to it but time and space was
creating
diamond souls
over vast periods of time so
layers and layers and layers of
intelligence operating at different
levels
so
when i read your book chris i mean it's
literally mind-blowing i mean it it's
kind of it feels as though it's science
fiction or it's in the realms of science
fiction and yet for me there was nothing
in there that didn't sound right you
know it just kind of has that feeling ah
yes
i understand this and it feels right to
me um and i'd love to talk to you about
the evolutionary process you touched on
it a bit there but let's go into that in
more detail but first of all
reincarnation because
that is something that obviously we
don't all um feel is true but it you you
did earlier work on the subject of
reincarnation and just before we go on
to
the evolutionary um story that you've
seen could you talk about a little bit
about reincarnation and your work on it
and why you believe that that is what's
happening
well i did i wrote my first book on
reincarnation because i thought it was
such an essential principle because our
philosophical roads divide if you think
we only are on earth one time but we're
on earth multiple times those need to
different visions of reality
and today i think we have overwhelming
empirical evidence that reincarnation is
simply true it's a fact of life i think
ian stevenson at the university of
virginia and his study of young children
around the world who have spontaneous
memories over their most immediate life
he's just documented hundreds and
hundreds and hundreds of these children
uh and his his research has been
challenged but it's still it's holding
up and i think he is the charles darwin
of reincarnation studies and then we
have past live therapies
people coming in highly qualified people
healing using
past life access to past life memories
to heal present life traumas
this to me is just an empirical fact of
life so after
living it takes a long time to sort of
live in a reincarnation universe to
understand the implications of
the fact that there's this pulse of life
and that all of us have been here
multiple times and all of us have deeper
histories with place with people with
projects and that we're always starting
something and we're continuing something
in one lifetime and we're doing
something that's going to be continued
in another lifetime that this
overlapping complexity so that
i don't see little children as little
anymore i don't see old people as old
anymore
sometimes little children are deeply old
and soul and old people are sometimes
very young and soul and it sucks
you you just tune to a different level
now i had that
in the early stages of my psychedelic
work and in the early stages of my
psychedelic work
i was taken into some of the nuts and
bolts of reincarnation and karma and
then that became kind of ground one
as i began to be taken into
the human family and to experience the
human family evolving and growing
through reincarnation
this
to me reincarnation is simply the
higher octave of evolution it's the
cutting edge of evolution in our
particular species where evolution
was trying to change whole species
reincarnation is evolving individuals
within certain species and i don't think
just human species i think somewhere
lower down the line
reincarnation begins to turn in gestate
um
and then the question becomes well
where is reincarnation taking us
if we are reincarnating so many times
where are we going what's what's all
project of it what's the purpose of it
and to determine to answer the question
what's the purpose of a reincarnating
species is complicated because
once you understand that every human
being on the planet
is reincarnating with a purpose its
specific purpose
then you realize the full breadth of the
living experience of a human being the
breadth of what's being learned
that what humanity is learning is just
enormous and when we try to say well
this is the purpose of life we have a
tendency to sort of take a purpose that
we can identify with and maybe over
generalize it to encompass all purposes
so we really have to look at the whole
of the human family
and gestate the whole of the things that
people are learning
to even begin to come up with some
generality that encompasses them all you
see what i mean
so
so in some cases
we can be learning love we can be
learning generosity we can be learning
strength of self we can be learning
physical defense we can be learning
surrendering physical defense what one
person is growing into in one lifetime
another person may be growing out of and
both of them are living
their truth
at a process level
most of the eastern religions basically
say
yes you grow you activate the chakras
you bring higher and higher levels of
consciousness online but when your
consciousness opens up to
divine essence when it opens up to the
you that is
more real than any of your individual
private incarnational use the divine you
the essential you when you open up to
that then you reach enlightenment but
the hindus call moksha means you can
escape you can leave so you once you
wake up then let's get out of here
there's better places to be than earth
so that it's nothing not cosmology
but what happened in my
sessions was different than that
i reached a point about halfway on my
journey
when
all of my former lives began to come
into me i was in a
again a kind of a pregnant time reality
of deep time and my former lives were
coming in and were coming in and it was
like wrapping a
filament of kite string around a spool
but that
spring was human experience it was whole
human lifetimes
and they kept coming together and they
reached a critical mass and when they
reached a critical mass they fused into
one
when that happened there was a
tremendous explosion of energy
and a diamond luminosity exploded from
my chest
and that's when i began to understand
and was shown
that
we make progress incrementally lifetime
by lifetime as we incarnate but the goal
is not simply to make incremental
progress the goal eventually
is that all of our lives come infused
into one and we become
on earth
a being who has a hundred thousand
hundreds of thousands of years of
history in it awakened within it and
empowered within it that is the being
that we are becoming and that is a
different kind of being
than an egoic being
it's the vast depth of its heart is deep
is bigger the breath of its mind is
bigger the texture of its social
relationships is bigger and its
relationship to nature is different
because it knows that the world we leave
is the world we inherit
it has a deeper embodied texture
of its relationship with nature
and
my
discovery was that this is not simply a
path of individuals this is simply a
story of individual spiritual awakening
that we are all going into this
transition we are all giving birth to
the diamond soul the entire species is
at a point in its history where it can
no longer afford the luxury of trying to
live on this planet in the fragmented
egoic state
when the world order is created by egos
it leads to a fragmented order
that serves some and not others but when
the soul wakes up
to the with the profound compassion of
its history
the soul lives on this planet
differently
than the ego does and i think we are
coming into a very profound
tumultuous period of history which i
think of as a birth process
it will feel like a death process and it
is a death process it's basically
destroying the culture
that was built by the ego and destroying
the ego which built that culture and
in that process of dying to that which
is small
giving birth to something new
giving birth literally to a new stage in
the human story
not a
new body politic and new economics and a
a shift i think is taking place at the
depths of the collective unconscious
the plate tectonics of the collective
psyche are shifting in that jungian
sense deep deep down inside the human
psyche this transformation is taking
place
so that
all human beings
who are born
after this transition
will be living their individual life
within the matrix
of a different collective psyche
that i think is the work of the hour and
that's what we are working to and part
of this to actualize and part of this is
reawakening
to the divine presence which we've
stripped out of nature tried to
unsuccessfully
but reawakening to this common ground
that we have with nature to this
intelligence that surrounds us and
saturates us
wow
chris i mean i'm imagining the people
hearing this for the first time it's
kind of difficult to get your head
around it and i want to think what i
want to bring colin in in a minute so to
summarize in my kind of uh terms and
what you're talking about really is is
the evolution of the human species
individuals and collectively towards a
position where we can remember our
entire history so if we take
reincarnation as a given
then we're evolving towards a place
where we can remember
past our past incarnations on this earth
and you know
colin can i bring you in here because
there's something that you uh talk about
you know
in reanimating ourselves we need to
have a completely new cognitive
framework you know that the
the the the way of connecting to the
intelligence in the universe is so
foreign to us now that we need a whole
different framework to kind of be able
to
wrestle with with that kind of
information what's your feeling about
what chris is talking about i know
you've read the book too and i know you
love it so
biased question here but yeah from your
perspective
thanks rachel uh well first of all i i
really wanted to say how much of an
honor it is to meet you chris
um i i have to say you know the
encounter with your books and the first
one i encountered was dark knight early
dawn
was was really um well tectonic in
nature for me it was
and i'm filled with questions and was
and have been all the way through
uh reading your books and rereading them
and reading them again and thinking
about it and brewing on it and
a lot of the questions i really want to
ask i i have no idea how i would even
articulate i can feel them and i can
sense them but
how
um and i you know
so i mean i can feel myself at the sort
of edges you know of my
what i call my present cognition because
you know i was
i was lucky enough to be
born into and brought up within
a traditional indigenous culture here in
southern africa
um
and through through my childhood lived
in wilderness and among people who had a
very very particular relationship with
wilderness and the cosmology that came
out of that
and subsequently i find myself you know
in
in in in the worlds of of uh
um
posting a post-industrial world trying
to reconcile
that part of me
with the part of me i find myself in now
um
and and finding that that is it's very
difficult to bring it feels like in a
certain sense that there are two
cognitive frameworks within me at some
level and that somehow
i'm tasked with trying to reconcile
these two parts of myself
and reading reading through your books
you know where i found myself i found
myself pulled back into
the cognitive system really that i i
grew up in and it
forms a kind of an understructure within
my experience now um
and
but i mean within that then i have i
have questions i mean loads of them
which which your books really really
brought up in me and and among them
among the most um
difficult to articulate are questions
around time
and and the notion
that somehow rather you know so
reincarnation is not something that
really comes into the cosmologies here
in southern africa and yet it does
it's it's implicit in certain terms
but i'm really
so so as we look at this idea of
reincarnation
and the cognitive framework that i would
perceive it from here as we speak about
it
relies on a sequence of time that speaks
of a past from which we come and a
future to which we go
but what happens if we take that out if
in fact if in fact that's nearly my
present cognitive framework but you know
how would we understand
uh
reincarnation and the notion of a
trajectory towards something
if time in its kind of sequence from
beginning to seeming culmination or some
such thing
if that wasn't the case um yeah
i don't know if i'm making any sense
that's making sense it's a good question
if you uh
if we eliminate the arrow of time
then reincarnation begins to look like
multi-incarnation not reincarnation some
people have conceptualized as we're
living all of our lives simultaneously
in a and and that we're interacting all
these lives are active and interacting
in a way that befuddles the logic of
linear development
and it requires a different kind of
logic and i've tried to think in that
world
multiple times
and i basically keep coming down to i
can't do it i mean i literally cannot
live in a world
where multi-incarnate
makes sense i can't make it make sense
uh now another little thread robert
monroe from the monroe institute of
applied science out of body guy you know
has been wrote three wonderful books in
the out-of-body state
exploring the universe daily from the
out of body state he says
you reach a point in your spiritual
development where you discover that you
can
incarnate in any time period you wish
so soul forward does not mean time
forward
right so you can incarnate in the 10th
century bc and next you could incarnate
in the 20th century a b
so
permeability of time
you see how that continues the concept
of linear development but it it flexes
on the concept of times absolute
linearity
for myself i've gone through so many
permutations of time
moving into deep time where you can ex i
i experienced my entire life in the
early stages earth to death
simultaneously present
absolutely i was experiencing the whole
of my life
the end and the beginning and all of its
development as a simultaneous
later i was taken into periods of time
where a hundred thousand years were
being lived out as if it were one minute
it's convinced me that
the universe has many modalities of time
built into it
that when we move into deeper
dimensionals of reality there are
different modalities of time that are
available there
all that
which you would think and it does make
me receptive to the idea of letting go
of a concept of linear time and linear
development
and somehow i try to reconcile the fact
that from the universe's perspective
there are multiple modalities of time so
that the universe can show me the future
from its time
which is and can give me the experience
of knowing the future as something which
has already happened and simultaneously
which is yet to happen
and at the same time
at the same time hold on to some notion
of
the value and the challenge of something
approximating linear development
and
i think
my best take is that life chops it's its
challenges to it it chops the learning
into bits and pieces
and we can't learn it all in one
lifetime we can't do it all
simultaneously it's easier if it's just
broken down into bits and pieces
um and if this if this
challenge of linear development
is coming to a fruition and is coming to
a diamond soul a an awareness that holds
all of its time moments in its present
consciousness on earth
this of course is not the end
of the developmental story of the linear
story because in a million years
we'll be farther in a billion years
will be farther still the universe is
just getting warmed up
you know is that we have no reason for
thinking that the universe is is in
anywhere near
the end of its evolutionary story we
know it's really at the early stages of
its story
so i think of
time as one of the great gifts
of evolution
individuality is one of the great gifts
of the physical universe time is one of
the gifts of the physical universe
behind that they lies
permutations of metaphysics that put
that are more fluid with respect to time
but inside space time
i think there is a an approximate linear
arrow of time
which serves the soul's purpose which
serves some deeper
cosmic web
and yet at the same time when we are in
the linear development
if we open up to the universe if we open
up to the universe's sense of time we
often get these flashes of
more than
more than the present you know more
parallel dimensions of time
so your question makes a lot of sense
and it's it's a substantive question
can i ask one colin or do you want to
come back on that
okay so
yeah great
this is the problem with your work chris
we need to keep trying to
we're we're out in kind of like um
inarticulable uh terrain aren't we um
when we get to that what you call the
diamond soul then when there's this
moment of um remembering
what what are the other attributes what
are the other kind of what does that
bring
other than remembering and wholeness you
know did you have an experience of what
else
well
first of all i think
full consciousness is what we return to
when we die so while we're in the bardo
earth bartle earth kind of stage
when we die we return to whole
consciousness so it's not something
we're unfamiliar with
it's something we are familiar with and
then we precipitate out of whole
consciousness into part consciousness
egoic consciousness and we return so
it's a
it's a constant accordion kind of effect
we die as we get large we're born we get
small we die we get large we're born we
get small sooner or later
if we just keep up for a few thousand
years 100 million years sooner or later
large
wakes up inside
physical consciousness and so it's a
it's simply
a consolidation of what's taking place
naturally normally it's just a stage in
this process
the times that i've
been carried into
deep time and experienced temporarily my
diamond soul and then
the diamond stool the soul
that's emerging as an archetypal imprint
an archetypal form
it's hard to describe because of the uh
enormity
and the beauty
and the joy
we're we're looking we're talking about
a human being that's completely healed
of all the wounds of history that's
healed of all the terrible things we've
done to each other men and women and
wars and violence it's healed all those
scars healed
a tremendous
breath of communion with the natural
world an intimacy with all life forms
not only then a breath of companionship
with all life and with other human
beings and with human community and with
natural nature's community
but an openness of the mind
able to take in more directly enter into
deeper communion with the intelligence
of the
universe i mean the genius of the
universe has all the answers to all the
technological limit questions we we
want to have answers to
and
we just are not able to download all
that knowledge and
the diamond soul
is a
more
complete and higher potency of
human being
that can enter into deeper downloads
from the divine intelligence
but it's not only an expansion of heart
and an expansion of mine
our physical senses
are also amplified
my
orders of magnitude
in the very very last session after 73
sessions the very last session
the universe gave me an experience of
what i called diamond vision
suddenly
in a kind of a late late session wind
down clear space
my vision became
thousands of times more cute and sharper
than it had ever been before i could see
things details
gradients of color sharpness and
precision of form i could just see i i
was amazed that i ever had accepted
this fuzzy stuff as real seeing this was
diamond clarity scene
and then after 10 minutes it
went away and i was seeing the way i
normally see
and that's when i discovered i realized
what i was being shown
is that we tend to think of sensation as
kind of a biomechanical process
but it's actually a conscious process
and the more consciousness which is pre
is present in this body
this body has built into it the capacity
for infinitely higher levels of sensate
experience
touch
hearing
seeing
sensitivities of
all
manner of physical sensations
so
it truly is
it's heaven and on earth in the body so
that the body participates in the
qualities of heaven
without having to leave the physical
existence that's why i mean it's not an
up and out cosmology it's bringing it in
deeper and deeper and deeper changing
literally the physiology of the body to
allow it to operate
in this
ecstatic state which becomes
the normal state
yeah that is a child i think is it's
worth the labor that we're going into to
give birth to and we are going in a
terribly terribly severe labor
our past is being stripped away
will be stripped away we will lose
all capacities that we associate with
normal and minimal existence this is
what happens in all mystical traditions
in all psychedelic traditions
literally the small has to be broken
ground to dust
stripped and dismembered
in order for the new
to awaken within us
and this is happening now historically
where we're entering into what i think
of as the dark knight of our collective
soul
the dark night is an image often used
for a hard time but it's not a hard time
in john of the cross
the dark matter itself is a hard time
the dark night of the soul is a very
very intense purification time which
immediately precedes the awakening of
full elimination
and the dark night of the of the
collective soul is a time of intense
purification
intense
loss of reality as we have known it up
to this point in time
and i think out of the out of the pain
and suffering that's coming it's going
to crack us open
and and break us down to our center
and
[Music]
in this ordeal
we will
not survive but we will give birth to
that in us
which is
more beautiful
more ecstatic more competent more
plugged in
i think we truly are becoming a species
of buddhas species of christs and
prophets these are the models we've had
trying to give us some forevision
of what's happening in the early years
we could not imagine
ordinary human being reaching that level
of excellence but now we're beginning to
understand through reincarnation over
and over and over and over again slowly
we grow into that level
of excellence which is simply a level of
transparency
to the essential condition
[Music]
which in which
we experience
life the irony is we experience what's
always been happening all the way along
it's always been this way the universe
has always been one the universe has
always been filled with intelligence we
have always been empty of self but
somehow we distracted ourselves from
thinking that that's not there it's
always been there so we're waking up to
the paradise that the universe already
is
we've just been missing it
chris i i just find your experience and
your vision just such a hopeful one
as we
move into what we see as ecological
crisis and societal crisis and
i i just
again as i felt quite emotional said at
the beginning it was just one of the
most inspiring books or the most
inspiring book last year but what one of
the most of my lifetime you know i i'm
sure colin would agree with me
on that so it's so wonderful to hear you
speak we have 10 minutes i wonder if
anybody had any questions um
i appreciate it's quite a lot to take on
but um please do raise your hand if you
have anything to ask chris also to say
we've invited chris back because back
later uh in the year to be with us um a
bit more so there'll be more opportunity
to talk with him
does anybody have a question
otherwise i'm going to pick on colin
again because i know you've got a list
colin
rachel maybe i can speak to the question
i put in the chat
it was really for stefan but it was
kind of a tiny tiny
gesture towards some sense of rightness
and these much much bigger movements
that we can't even begin to fathom and
then
uh chris used to spoken that on
paradigms that i've never heard before
and
part of me
feels so extremely joyful and like
rachel i'm
kind of want to weep because at the same
time and as we
are entering this dark night of the soul
which i think most of us kind of know we
can feel it and
uh it's
as i don't know you know it
i feel like small and i'm a mother of
three kids and
i you know and i'm trying to
understand how to be a mother in this
moment in time
and to
love my children well and i'm not very
sure how to do that so it's a very human
thing but it's the sort of smallest
fractals of all the
other
things if i can make any sense in that
and i just wondered if you could speak
to that a little bit
no uh a couple thoughts one of them is
first i i absolutely identify with what
you're saying i have three children
and uh
parenting is
of the age and the age we're going into
is going to be different than the
parenting of the age we're coming out of
because
you know we're trying to inculcate a
different set of values in our children
as we internalize these values ourselves
and i think that's how nature works each
one of us is a cell within a
fractal cell within a tissue of
consciousness and the tissue of the body
and
we are as we actualize the future in our
individual eyes
we catalyze an actualization of the
future in our collective lives and we do
it not simply by example
we do it because every person who
internalizes and becomes the future that
we know we need to become
they become a seed catalyst which
psychically
activates the web of transformation in
people they will never know they will
never meet necessarily but it's there
just as we have been nourished by the
ancestors we have been nourished by
other people who are making
transformation
our transformation nourishes other
people this came out in my sessions
multiple times that the states of
consciousness i was entering into were
being fed into the collective psyche
we're filtering into the collective
psyche so when we do ritual at dawn
when we do rituals of embracing the sun
as as a representative of this larger
collective intelligence when we do
rituals of conservation
and cultivate a lifestyle of using less
and doing more
when we actualize those things
we make it that much easier for the
entire
species a whole to actualize those
things until eventually we come to a
tipping point right
and at the tipping point the uncommon
sense starts to become common
sense and this you know this
transformation is not something that's
going to happen to us though i think
there is a way in which nature knows
what it is doing we are not generating
this transformation nature is doing it
nature is taking us through it but we
are cooperating with this process
and it's not going to be handed to us we
have to create it
we have to create it out of the fabric
of our
being where we are living and here's a
very another consoling thought
when you look at the reincarnation
literature you look at the near-death
episode literature one thing it becomes
very clear we choose the incarnations
that we find ourselves in
so at a time when we knew more we knew
what we were getting into we knew what
this century was going to be about we
knew that the dark night of the soul was
coming upon us
we made a choice to incarnate where we
did and to become the people that we are
we
and so therefore
each one of us carries a component
of the transformation that humanity is
trying to make each one of us is the
question is not what what can we do
the question is do we have the courage
to do what is within our reach to do
because what is within our reach has
already been decided by the soul
okay
so parenting is a big part of this
transition
everything that we're doing art medicine
knowledge
communication technology
is a big part of this transition
we're working it as we go
oh thank you chris
thank you
great thank you so much for
sticking with us um i can see some hands
up here just to say we have rocketed
over time um
we
were going to edit it to be less than an
hour but when we came to do the editing
we found that we couldn't and
i really wanted to include that question
at the end because it's very much brings
it down to what can we do
um so apologies for that
um
we'd love you to stay a little bit
longer to uh to kind of share your
thoughts
um i saw two hands up there one was
carol
another one was isabella carol would you
like to go first
if you unmute yourself
okay gabby can you unmute are we all
so the technology
you can everyone can unmute themselves
fantastic carol
thank you um
yeah
i'm sort of rendered speechless
but
but um
i i wanted to ask what i thought i heard
chris say was
at the end there
was that our task is to
tune in to
who we really are
in this lifetime and live that
and that's the best we can do
because my first question was what what
ritual can i do what task you know would
would accelerate this process
but it sounds like from what he says
that
that's not what it's about it's about
living what we've
dreamt in for this lifetime
would you agree with that or comment on
that
that's certainly what i heard and
actually if you read the book i think
that's pretty much what he's saying as
well colin would you like to comment on
that
um yeah i think that is very much what
he's saying i mean you know a lot of
what he says
um
in in the duration of this talk it's a
it's a tiny fragment of
much much bigger body of work um you
know dating back into stan groff's work
and so on
so to really get a sense of what each of
the little statements he makes
the importance of what he's saying it's
it's kind of
it's helpful to have a have have have
that within the context of the much
bigger picture
um but i think you know um
yeah as i was as i was we were coming to
the end of this i suddenly thought back
and i thought i made a mistake
when i um during the introduction i said
oh you know i spoke of
the subtitle of his book as being the
new ecology of mind steps towards the
new equality of mind when in fact it
steps towards the deep ecology of mind
but but i think that
you know that that's um
that having listened to the talk you can
probably realize why i made that mistake
because we're we're in a moment now
which is
unprecedented i mean any moment of
experience is unprecedented
we are
we are as individuals as a collective as
a globe as a universe this is an
unprecedented moment
and yet at the same time
we come out of a long long long long
history
um
that this this new component of who we
are is so on one level we're
we're pulling back
into we're go we're potentially um and
what we once did much more effectively i
think is we
we go back into our
our historic roots our experiential
historic roots our psycho spiritual
historic roots and we
draw into
informing this present moment those
what we've gathered in that time
but then in that moment also we
potentially translate it into
a response to the newness of where we
are now and i really think that's the
task of our time
uh and the part that we're not doing
very well at the moment is this reaching
back into
the vast
um form of who we who we are
is is kind of is expressed also in our
long long long long long history our
trajectory of
where we've come from to get here
so so i think that um
you know the totality of who we are is
is as chris points out it's kind of
always there
um it's always naturally going on but we
we compress ourselves into a fragment of
that
and a lifetime is in a certain sense
but equally and
as importantly i think this particular
time that we're in now
you know what i tend to refer to as an
industrial cultural global globalized
time
is even more so you know because i think
we've we've condensed ourselves
and retracted ourselves retracted the
notion of who we are into a
an even
tinier fragment than we might have done
previously and so
um
i do think what we're tasked with right
now very very fundamentally is
remembering on the one hand which is
going back and finding ways of
re-entering into
what is inherently in us which is our
past
which is dynamically still presence in
us and active in us
and at the same time
springing out of that into a dreaming of
who we are now
and what is asked of us
in this in this moment what is what what
does it mean now to be in this newness
and this as chris so beautifully puts it
this tectonic
um
profoundly
all-encompassing
seeming change of what it means to be
human and and and presumably what it
means to be a universe at some level um
so i think you know it's a what you're
asking is an incredibly important
question and i think it's a huge one and
and probably one which needs a
considerable amount of pondering but
i'll say that for the time being
yeah
yeah um
my experience in this lifetime is
many many different ways of being
and um
i'm aware of the sort of small selves
that just gets on with everyday life and
doesn't and isn't really
doing much but then there's part of me
that
is doing much more interesting stuff or
much
more spiritual stuff
and um
my question with that is
can i relax and let that happen will it
happen or should i be focusing you know
should i be
there's always this worry isn't there
that the world's gonna end and we
haven't done enough and all that kind of
anxiety that comes from the industrial
setup here
but there's no answer probably
one to brew one
yeah it's always brewing
oh isabella you had a question
you're gonna have to unmute i'm afraid
oh yes really thank you um it's my name
is actually christina but i'm on my
walters laptop sorry
so that's why the zoom is is named um
isabella
um
it's maybe more of an observation or i
don't know exactly but
um i have to admit that i haven't read
that book
yet um but i had many of my own
experiences of of lsd and ayahuasca when
i was young
and it has certainly informed my life
and i would you know completely agree
with so so so many things that he said
um up to now
and i have been thinking about this a
long time but never very scientifically
but just try to live by what i had
experienced and learned
but one thing
always puzzled me because like he said
at the very beginning it is
um
to taking off of the drugs is a shortcut
to an opening
into a world
in a way i always felt that and i always
felt that
um it it has
kind of helped me to
have a
bigger understanding of the universe and
of many many things that he has been
talking about and in particular
to all these connections and to the
connections
also to
my ancestry
and to the wisdom
of my ancestors
and
and i always felt an obligation in some
ways for some strange reason
to try and share this with others
and in my case i did try to do that
mostly through art
but then my observation was
that
we are all on so
many in different stages in our lives
and in our
i suppose i don't know in that
so-called journey or you know whatever
that it's very very difficult to
often try and explain
all these
things that we can actually see in all
these connections
to people who may not have
had
the privilege of of being
opening the mind
and so i've often wondered if we say we
about the collective
well does that actually really exist
you know is that does that time that we
are apparently entering
exist as a
collective
or is it just some
who are at a certain stage
in their
um
rebirth
or
reincarnation or whatever it is
and you know does that actually is there
even a sort of a time
of that
or is that some somehow an illusion
we have created for ourselves to try and
understand things i don't know
i'm not sure if i make myself clear it's
really difficult to
talk about these things
i'm thinking of what he was saying about
um
if if the individual does it then it
kind of adds to the collective and i'm
just thinking of rupert sheldrake's
morphic resonance um
colin will be able to kind of talk more
about that but i i just wonder if it's
that kind of process at work that when
once the individuals start then it just
becomes easier for the collective is
that what you're saying christina i i
may have understood
yes i mean i i'm not sure what i'm
saying it's more that i'm asking i've
often you know there is there's maybe
this this worry or this doubt because i
have become very very aware and
hopefully tried at least very hard to to
to live my life
in a way that being very aware of every
thing you say and everything every
gesture one
does and you know every pebble you drop
into the pond has a as a you know
yeah it does make some sort of a little
wave perhaps and it touches things and
it changes things and it changes the
universe
if you wish um so there is that
awareness but i'm not sure that that
awareness is really
the same for everybody and yes it does
make a big difference
but at the same time we are worrying
about an age we are entering right now
and i do don't get me wrong and i like
you know to think about this but at the
same time i'm sort of thinking hang on a
minute in a way
that doesn't really make sense in the
big scheme of the universe
because it has all it's already there it
has already been it's already you know
whatever comes it's not
particularly new entrance into something
because some people are at this stage
another surprise or or some
you know we have already had
it's it's not the same exactly
but it's
it's not necessarily very specific just
to our very lifetime here and now
because the same pains the same
choice the same thing has it been
experienced a million million times
for in a way and it is in the end about
the individual
which
also has been historically named so many
times like
interestingly what carol says it is it
is like the greek poets have been very
clear about saying
and become who you are
in a way and that's
that's development isn't it that i'm to
have that understanding of the universe
and of the vastness
and of the lack of
boundaries in a way and that everything
is interconnected absolutely everything
so i don't know anyway
thank you so much christopher
and i'm sure that we could like really
explore that we have about six minutes
left teresa's got a question before and
i come to youtube's i just wanted to say
as well just in case people have to go
um
so chris is going to come back as part
of our contemporary animism program
which starts again in july we have a new
intake every year so we still have some
places on that somebody was saying that
they'd love to jackie you were saying
that you'd love to explore this kind of
um subject more that's what we're hoping
to do in this year's um programme
breathing workshops absolutely again
jackie you're saying that it'd be
wonderful to have a breathing workshop
i'm hoping that we're going to do that
as part of this program as well but yes
absolutely breath work uh certainly for
me it's where it's at um
yeah so therese i wanted to come to you
and if anybody has one put up your
digital hand and we'll try and get them
in but please
lovely to see you um it's just a comment
i don't know uh i haven't read his books
i haven't actually heard of him before
but it's just an observation of
something that he
he said that even though he kind of
rejects the
transcendent thought
of
or the thought of transcending
earthly
bodily reality
like you find in much
eastern thought
he still presents an idea that by um
that fits very neatly with our western
thought of evolution
and development
and i'm i'm not sure quite what i think
about that
it's like he he takes something old
evolutionary thought and rejects it and
he presents
uh rip um replaces it with another one
and
i
i don't know i guess i'd like to see
more of using his experience as a way to
[Music]
accept that time isn't linear and
things
exists at the same time
in different layers
here and now and not necessarily for a
means but just that this is how it is
i'm not sure if i'm making much sense
but um
yeah yeah do you have a response on that
colin
uh well i think you're opening a it's a
kind of door handle thing where
we could we could spend the rest of the
night on this topic yeah yeah yeah yeah
yeah important one
i'm sorry
it's very important and and i i i think
you're raising some very interesting
question it kind of
harkens back into my my question around
time and how we perceive things
um
you know
and when we
we have this notion i think that as
western well as humanity that we have a
certain way of perceiving time
and that that's what being that's part
of being human i don't agree with that i
think that the way we perceive time and
the way we perceive the the nature of
sequential events is very characteristic
of a particular
moment in our history as human beings
and is definitely not necessarily the
case in our earlier states and perhaps
won't be in our future states either
um so so in a way
but what we what we are
what we have to struggle with is the
fact that we are indeed immersed within
this framework that we call
present existence you know in in the
particular cultural
socio-cultural kind of framework that
we're in and you know and so
when we have these conversations you
know we're we're tasked with
um modulating to other views and other
perspectives that we might have within
us and within our history and so on
you know circular dynamics as opposed to
linear dynamics and so on
but at the same time i think we we're
we're also tasked with coming back to
risk with rest within where we are in
order to
uh not get completely lost in the
translative process that we're trying to
do
so you know i think that
i mean i don't really
i wouldn't know how to answer the
question exactly but
uh you know i i think that we um
i'm opening a can that could last
forever now let me stop there but i
think it's a really good question and i
think it's an interesting thing to
ponder further
yeah
thank you
which we're gonna have to do because
it's time or it's time a long time ago
actually i do apologize for keeping you
longer than you're expecting um
lovely to see you look we have a small
little group that made it to the end um
[Music]
yes
don't know what more to say really that
was chris batch check out his books um
have a look at our contemporary animism
program if you want to do more of that
kind of conversation we also do a lot of
embodied stuff as well it's not just all
uh
talking so um
lovely to see you tonight everybody and
uh see you very soon
bye for now thank you gabby thank you
colin thank you for coming thank you
very much
thank you
bye
[Music]
thank you